data-transforms/regex/README.adoc, before:

= Filter Messages into a New Topic using a Regex
:page-layout: lab
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Development, Stream Processing, Data Transforms
:description: Filter messages from one topic into another using regular expressions (regex) and data transforms.
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 23.3.5
:latest-console-version: 2.4.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

// ========================AUTOMATED TESTS===================================
// The comments in this file are used to run automated tests of all the documented steps. Tests are run on each pull request to the upstream repository using GitHub Actions. For more details about the testing tool we use, see https://doc-detective.com/.

// (test start {"id":"data-transform-regex-go", "description": "Filter Messages into a New Topic using a Regex", "setup": "doc-tests/fetch-versions-and-rpk.json", "cleanup": "doc-tests/cleanup.json"})

This is an example of how to filter messages from one topic into another using regular expressions (regex) and Redpanda data transforms. If a source topic contains a key or value that matches the regex, it will be produced to the sink topic.

Regexes are implemented using Go's `regexp` library, which uses the same syntax as RE2.
See the https://github.com/google/re2/wiki/Syntax[RE2 wiki] for help with syntax.

The regex used in this example matches the typical email address pattern.

== Prerequisites

You must have the following:

- At least version 1.20 of https://go.dev/doc/install[Go^] installed on your host machine.
- link:https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/rpk-install/[Install `rpk`] on your host machine.
- https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `data-transforms/regex/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/data-transforms/regex
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to at least version 23.3.1. Data transforms was introduced in this version. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION={latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION={latest-console-version}
----

. Start Redpanda in Docker by running the following command:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d --wait
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose up -d --wait"})
// Wait for the containers to finish getting up and running
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 5000})

. Set up your rpk profile:
+
```bash
rpk profile create regex --from-profile profile.yml
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk profile create regex --from-profile profile.yml"})

. Create the required topics:
+
```bash
rpk topic create src sink
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk topic create src sink"})

. Build the transforms function:
+
```bash
rpk transform build
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk transform build"})

. Deploy the transforms function:
+
```bash
./deploy-transform.sh
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "./deploy-transform.sh"})
// Wait for the transform to be processed by Redpanda
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 10000})
+
See the file `deploy-transform.sh` to understand the regex used in the transform. Only input that matches the regular expression will be transformed.
+
This example accepts the following environment variables:
+
- `PATTERN` (*required*): The regex to match against records. Here, the regex finds messages containing email addresses.
- `MATCH_VALUE`: By default, the regex matches record keys, but if set to `true`, the regex will match values.

. Run `rpk topic produce`:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic produce src
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "bash ../../setup-tests/tools/rpk-produce.sh", "args": ["src", "Hello, please contact us at help@example.com."]})

. Paste the following into the prompt and press kbd:[Ctrl + C] to exit:
+
```json
Hello, please contact us at help@example.com.
Hello, please contact us at support.example.com.
Hello, please contact us at help@example.edu.
```

. Consume the sink topic to see that input lines containing email addresses were extracted and produced to the sink topic:
+
```bash
rpk topic consume sink --num 2
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk topic consume sink --num 1"})
+
[json, role="no-copy"]
----
{
  "topic": "sink",
  "value": "Hello, please contact us at help@example.com.",
  "timestamp": 1714525578013,
  "partition": 0,
  "offset": 0
}
{
  "topic": "sink",
  "value": "Hello, please contact us at help@example.edu.",
  "timestamp": 1714525579192,
  "partition": 0,
  "offset": 1
}
----

Note that the second input line, `Hello, please contact us at support.example.com.`, is not in the sink topic because the string did not match the regex (there is no email address). 

You can also see this in http://localhost:8080/topics/sink?p=-1&s=50&o=-1#messages[Redpanda Console].

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk profile delete regex"})
// (test end)

Commit message:

add view of src topic
Signed-off-by: DanRoscigno <dan@roscigno.com>

data-transforms/regex/README.adoc, after:

= Filter Messages into a New Topic using a Regex
:page-layout: lab
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Development, Stream Processing, Data Transforms
:description: Filter messages from one topic into another using regular expressions (regex) and data transforms.
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 23.3.5
:latest-console-version: 2.4.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

// ========================AUTOMATED TESTS===================================
// The comments in this file are used to run automated tests of all the documented steps. Tests are run on each pull request to the upstream repository using GitHub Actions. For more details about the testing tool we use, see https://doc-detective.com/.

// (test start {"id":"data-transform-regex-go", "description": "Filter Messages into a New Topic using a Regex", "setup": "doc-tests/fetch-versions-and-rpk.json", "cleanup": "doc-tests/cleanup.json"})

This is an example of how to filter messages from one topic into another using regular expressions (regex) and Redpanda data transforms. If a source topic contains a key or value that matches the regex, it will be produced to the sink topic.

Regexes are implemented using Go's `regexp` library, which uses the same syntax as RE2.
See the https://github.com/google/re2/wiki/Syntax[RE2 wiki] for help with syntax.

The regex used in this example matches the typical email address pattern.

== Prerequisites

You must have the following:

- At least version 1.20 of https://go.dev/doc/install[Go^] installed on your host machine.
- link:https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/rpk-install/[Install `rpk`] on your host machine.
- https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `data-transforms/regex/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/data-transforms/regex
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to at least version 23.3.1. Data transforms was introduced in this version. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION={latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION={latest-console-version}
----

. Start Redpanda in Docker by running the following command:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d --wait
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose up -d --wait"})
// Wait for the containers to finish getting up and running
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 5000})

. Set up your rpk profile:
+
```bash
rpk profile create regex --from-profile profile.yml
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk profile create regex --from-profile profile.yml"})

. Create the required topics:
+
```bash
rpk topic create src sink
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk topic create src sink"})

. Build the transforms function:
+
```bash
rpk transform build
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk transform build"})

. Deploy the transforms function:
+
```bash
./deploy-transform.sh
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "./deploy-transform.sh"})
// Wait for the transform to be processed by Redpanda
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 10000})
+
See the file `deploy-transform.sh` to understand the regex used in the transform. Only input that matches the regular expression will be transformed.
+
This example accepts the following environment variables:
+
- `PATTERN` (*required*): The regex to match against records. Here, the regex finds messages containing email addresses.
- `MATCH_VALUE`: By default, the regex matches record keys, but if set to `true`, the regex will match values.

. Run `rpk topic produce`:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic produce src
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "bash ../../setup-tests/tools/rpk-produce.sh", "args": ["src", "Hello, please contact us at help@example.com."]})

. Paste the following into the prompt and press kbd:[Ctrl + C] to exit:
+
```json
Hello, please contact us at help@example.com.
Hello, please contact us at support.example.com.
Hello, please contact us at help@example.edu.
```

. Consume the sink topic to see that input lines containing email addresses were extracted and produced to the sink topic:
+
```bash
rpk topic consume sink --num 2
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk topic consume sink --num 1"})
+
[json, role="no-copy"]
----
{
  "topic": "sink",
  "value": "Hello, please contact us at help@example.com.",
  "timestamp": 1714525578013,
  "partition": 0,
  "offset": 0
}
{
  "topic": "sink",
  "value": "Hello, please contact us at help@example.edu.",
  "timestamp": 1714525579192,
  "partition": 0,
  "offset": 1
}
----

Note that the second input line, `Hello, please contact us at support.example.com.`, is not in the sink topic because the string did not match the regex (there is no email address). 

You can also see the `sink` topic contents in http://localhost:8080/topics/sink?p=-1&s=50&o=-1#messages[Redpanda Console].

Switch to the http://localhost:8080/topics/src?p=-1&s=50&o=-1#messages[`src` topic] to see all of the events, including the one that does not match the regex and is not in the `sink` topic.

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "rpk profile delete regex"})
// (test end)
