docker-compose/console-plain-login/README.adoc, before:

= Enable Plain Login Authentication for Redpanda Console
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Security, Management, Redpanda Console
:description: Deploy Redpanda Console with a plain login provider so that users of Redpanda Console must log in with a username and password.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.2.7
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This Docker Compose file configures Redpanda Console with a plain login provider so that users of Redpanda Console must log in with a username and password.

This example uses features that require a license key for Redpanda Enterprise Edition. The license key is uploaded to the Redpanda broker through a separate container called `redpandarpk`. This container executes the `rpk cluster license set` command to load the license key from the given filepath. To request a trial license, to extend your trial period, or to purchase an Enterprise Edition license,
contact https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda?section=enterprise-trial[Redpanda Sales^].

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

== Run the lab

// For GitHub, provide instructions for cloning the repo.
ifndef::env-site[]
. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/console-plain-login/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/console-plain-login
----
endif::[]
// For the docs site, provide a download link since we have symlinked the Docker Compose file into the attachments directory of the Antora structure. See https://docs.antora.org/antora/latest/page/attachments/
ifdef::env-site[]
. xref:redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$console-plain-login/docker-compose.yml[Download] the following Docker Compose file on your local file system.
+
NOTE: If you are running on an ARM-based device such as the Apple M1 chip, uncomment the `platform: 'linux/amd64'` lines.
+
.Reveal the Docker Compose file
[%collapsible]
====
.`docker-compose.yml`
[,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
include::redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$console-plain-login/docker-compose.yml[]
----
====
endif::[]

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Save your license key to `license/redpanda.license` in the same location as your Docker Compose file. Or, to use another location, update the license paths in the Docker Compose file to another directory that contains your license key.

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080[localhost:8080^] and log in with the credentials for `john` or `jane`, which are defined in the Docker Compose file in the `CONSOLE_CONFIG_FILE` environment variable.

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```

Commit message:

Callout WSL is required for Windows (#270)

docker-compose/console-plain-login/README.adoc, after:

= Enable Plain Login Authentication for Redpanda Console
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Security, Management, Redpanda Console
:description: Deploy Redpanda Console with a plain login provider so that users of Redpanda Console must log in with a username and password.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.2.7
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This Docker Compose file configures Redpanda Console with a plain login provider so that users of Redpanda Console must log in with a username and password.

This example uses features that require a license key for Redpanda Enterprise Edition. The license key is uploaded to the Redpanda broker through a separate container called `redpandarpk`. This container executes the `rpk cluster license set` command to load the license key from the given filepath. To request a trial license, to extend your trial period, or to purchase an Enterprise Edition license,
contact https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda?section=enterprise-trial[Redpanda Sales^].

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

This lab is intended for Linux and macOS users. If you are using Windows, you must use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run the commands in this lab.

== Run the lab

// For GitHub, provide instructions for cloning the repo.
ifndef::env-site[]
. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/console-plain-login/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/console-plain-login
----
endif::[]
// For the docs site, provide a download link since we have symlinked the Docker Compose file into the attachments directory of the Antora structure. See https://docs.antora.org/antora/latest/page/attachments/
ifdef::env-site[]
. xref:redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$console-plain-login/docker-compose.yml[Download] the following Docker Compose file on your local file system.
+
NOTE: If you are running on an ARM-based device such as the Apple M1 chip, uncomment the `platform: 'linux/amd64'` lines.
+
.Reveal the Docker Compose file
[%collapsible]
====
.`docker-compose.yml`
[,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
include::redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$console-plain-login/docker-compose.yml[]
----
====
endif::[]

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Save your license key to `license/redpanda.license` in the same location as your Docker Compose file. Or, to use another location, update the license paths in the Docker Compose file to another directory that contains your license key.

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080[localhost:8080^] and log in with the credentials for `john` or `jane`, which are defined in the Docker Compose file in the `CONSOLE_CONFIG_FILE` environment variable.

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```
