docker-compose/owl-shop/README.adoc, before:

= Owl Shop Example Application in Docker
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Monitoring, Management
:description: Manage and monitor applications in Redpanda Console using data from an example e-commerce application called owl shop.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.3.9
:latest-console-version: 3.0.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This Docker Compose example starts a single Redpanda broker, Redpanda Console, and an example application called _owl shop_. Owl shop simulates a simple e-commerce shop that uses Redpanda as an asynchronous communication exchange. You can use the sample data to see how to manage and monitor applications in Redpanda Console. Owl shop creates topics, produces sample data to those topics, and consumes from those topics so that you can test Redpanda Console with some.

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

== Run the lab

// For GitHub, provide instructions for cloning the repo.
ifndef::env-site[]
. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/owl-shop/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/owl-shop
----
endif::[]
// For the docs site, provide a download link since we have symlinked the Docker Compose file into the attachments directory of the Antora structure. See https://docs.antora.org/antora/latest/page/attachments/
ifdef::env-site[]
. xref:redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$owl-shop/docker-compose.yml[Download] the following Docker Compose file on your local file system.
+
NOTE: If you are running on an ARM-based device such as the Apple M1 chip, uncomment the `platform: 'linux/amd64'` lines.
+
.Reveal the Docker Compose file
[%collapsible]
====
.`docker-compose.yml`
[,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
include::redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$owl-shop/docker-compose.yml[]
----
====
endif::[]

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
NOTE: You must use at least version v3.0.0 of Redpanda Console to deploy this lab.
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION=v{latest-console-version}
----

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080[localhost:8080^] and go to *Topics* to see the owl shop topics.

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```

Commit message:

Callout WSL is required for Windows

docker-compose/owl-shop/README.adoc, after:

= Owl Shop Example Application in Docker
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Monitoring, Management
:description: Manage and monitor applications in Redpanda Console using data from an example e-commerce application called owl shop.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.3.9
:latest-console-version: 3.0.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This Docker Compose example starts a single Redpanda broker, Redpanda Console, and an example application called _owl shop_. Owl shop simulates a simple e-commerce shop that uses Redpanda as an asynchronous communication exchange. You can use the sample data to see how to manage and monitor applications in Redpanda Console. Owl shop creates topics, produces sample data to those topics, and consumes from those topics so that you can test Redpanda Console with some.

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

This lab is intended for Linux and macOS users. If you are using Windows, you must use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run the commands in this lab.

== Run the lab

// For GitHub, provide instructions for cloning the repo.
ifndef::env-site[]
. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/owl-shop/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/owl-shop
----
endif::[]
// For the docs site, provide a download link since we have symlinked the Docker Compose file into the attachments directory of the Antora structure. See https://docs.antora.org/antora/latest/page/attachments/
ifdef::env-site[]
. xref:redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$owl-shop/docker-compose.yml[Download] the following Docker Compose file on your local file system.
+
NOTE: If you are running on an ARM-based device such as the Apple M1 chip, uncomment the `platform: 'linux/amd64'` lines.
+
.Reveal the Docker Compose file
[%collapsible]
====
.`docker-compose.yml`
[,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
include::redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$owl-shop/docker-compose.yml[]
----
====
endif::[]

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
NOTE: You must use at least version v3.0.0 of Redpanda Console to deploy this lab.
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION=v{latest-console-version}
----

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080[localhost:8080^] and go to *Topics* to see the owl shop topics.

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```
