kubernetes/iceberg/README.adoc, before:

= Iceberg Streaming Lab on Kubernetes with Redpanda, MinIO, and Spark
:env-kubernetes: true
:description: Pair Redpanda with MinIO for Tiered Storage and write data in the Iceberg format to enable seamless analytics workflows on data in Redpanda topics.
:page-layout: lab

This lab provides a local Kubernetes environment to help you quickly get started with Redpanda and its integration with Apache Iceberg. It showcases how Redpanda, when paired with a Tiered Storage solution like MinIO, can write data in the Iceberg format, enabling seamless analytics workflows. The lab also includes a Spark environment configured for querying the Iceberg tables using SQL within a Jupyter Notebook interface.

In this setup, you will:

- Produce data to Redpanda topics that are Iceberg-enabled.
- Observe how Redpanda writes this data in Iceberg format to MinIO as the Tiered Storage backend.
- Use Spark to query the Iceberg tables, demonstrating a complete pipeline from data production to querying.

This environment is ideal for experimenting with Redpanda's Iceberg and Tiered Storage capabilities, enabling you to test end-to-end workflows for analytics and data lake architectures.

== Prerequisites

=== System requirements

Make sure you have the following system requirements:

* **Operating System**: macOS, Linux, or Windows with WSL2
* **CPU**: Minimum 4 cores
* **Memory**: Minimum 8 GB RAM
* **Storage**: Minimum 20 GB free disk space for Docker images and data
* **Docker**: At least 6 GB memory allocation for Docker Desktop

=== Required tools

Install the following tools:

* https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/[Docker] (with sufficient memory allocation)
* https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/[kind] (Kubernetes in Docker)
* https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/[kubectl] (Kubernetes CLI)
* https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/[Helm] (Kubernetes package manager)


== Run the lab

Follow these steps to set up the lab environment:

=== Clone the repository

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
cd redpanda-labs/kubernetes/iceberg
----

=== Create the Kubernetes cluster and namespace

[source,bash]
----
kind create cluster --config kind.yaml
kubectl create namespace iceberg-lab
----

=== Configure Redpanda for Iceberg

Configuration for Redpanda is provided in `configmap.yaml` and `secret.yaml`. This sets up the necessary configurations for Iceberg topics and Tiered Storage.

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f configmap.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
kubectl apply -f secret.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
----

=== Deploy MinIO

. Deploy the MinIO Operator:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -k "github.com/minio/operator?ref=v5.0.18"
----

. Wait for the MinIO Operator to be ready:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl wait --for=condition=available deployment --all --namespace minio-operator --timeout=120s
----

. Create a MinIO instance:
+
[source,bash]
----
helm repo add minio-operator https://operator.min.io
helm repo update
helm upgrade --install iceberg-minio minio-operator/tenant \
  --namespace iceberg-lab \
  --version 7.1.1 \
  --values minio-tenant-values.yaml
----

. Wait for the MinIO instance to be ready:
+
[source,bash]
----
sleep 10 && kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod -l v1.min.io/tenant=iceberg-minio --namespace iceberg-lab --timeout=300s
----
+
If you see `error: no matching resources found`, it means the MinIO Operator has not yet created the Pods. Wait a few moments and try the command again.

=== Set up MinIO bucket and permissions

This step creates a job that sets up the MinIO bucket and permissions required for Redpanda to access the object store.

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f minio-setup-job.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
kubectl wait --for=condition=complete job/minio-setup --namespace iceberg-lab --timeout=60s
----

If the job times out, check the logs with `kubectl logs job/minio-setup --namespace iceberg-lab iceberg-lab`. If you see `400 Bad Request` errors, MinIO might have reverted to TLS mode. See the <<troubleshoot, troubleshooting section>>.

=== Deploy the Iceberg REST catalog

This step deploys the Iceberg REST catalog, which allows you to interact with Iceberg tables over HTTP. It uses a script to resolve the MinIO IP address and update the catalog configuration.

[source,bash]
----
./deploy-iceberg-rest-catalog.sh
----

You should see output indicating the catalog is deployed.

[role="no-copy no-wrap"]
----
=== Deployment Summary ===
✓ Iceberg REST catalog deployed successfully
✓ MinIO IP resolved and configured: 10.244.3.3
✓ Configuration file: rest-catalog.yaml

Next steps:
1. Test the catalog: kubectl port-forward -n iceberg-lab svc/iceberg-rest 8181:8181
2. Verify Redpanda integration: kubectl logs -n iceberg-lab deployment/iceberg-rest
3. Re-run this script if MinIO Pods restart or IPs change

For troubleshooting, see: dns-solution.md
----

=== Prepare Spark

. Label and taint your dedicated Spark worker node:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl label node kind-worker node-role.kubernetes.io/spark-node=true
kubectl taint nodes kind-worker dedicated=spark:NoSchedule
----

. Build and load the Spark Docker image:
+
[source,bash]
----
docker build -t spark-iceberg-jupyter:latest ./spark
kind load docker-image spark-iceberg-jupyter:latest --name kind --nodes kind-worker
----
+
This step builds the Spark image with Kubernetes-specific configurations for Iceberg and uploads it to the kind cluster. The Dockerfile automatically detects your system architecture (ARM64 or x86_64) and downloads the appropriate dependencies.
+
Wait for the build to complete and the image to be loaded into the kind cluster.

. Verify the image is loaded:
+
[source,bash]
----
docker exec -it kind-worker crictl images | grep spark-iceberg-jupyter
----
+
You should see output similar to the following:
+
[role="no-copy no-wrap"]
----
docker.io/library/spark-iceberg-jupyter    latest      86f20b1213dd3    3.83GB
----

. Deploy Spark:
+
[source,bash]
----
./deploy-spark.sh
----

=== Deploy Redpanda

[source,bash]
----
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm repo add redpanda https://charts.redpanda.com
helm repo update

helm install cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager \
  --set crds.enabled=true \
  --namespace cert-manager \
  --create-namespace \
  --version 1.17.4

echo "Deploying Redpanda (this may take a few minutes)"
helm upgrade --install redpanda redpanda/redpanda \
  --namespace iceberg-lab \
  --version 5.9.25 \
  --values redpanda-values.yaml
----

Wait for the Redpanda cluster to be ready:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl --namespace iceberg-lab rollout status statefulset redpanda --watch
----

When the Redpanda cluster is ready, the output should look similar to the following:

[.no-copy]
----
statefulset rolling update complete 3 pods at revision redpanda-8654f645b4...
----

=== Expose services

In this step, you set up access to the MinIO UI, Spark Jupyter Notebook, and Redpanda Console.

==== Set up MinIO console access

For reliable access to the MinIO console, create a NodePort service:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f minio-nodeport.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
----

The NodePort service exposes MinIO console on port 32090 of all cluster nodes. In a kind cluster, you can access it directly at: http://localhost:32090

NOTE: This approach avoids the known port-forwarding issues with MinIO console (see https://github.com/minio/object-browser/issues/2539[issue #2539]). The MinIO Console UI requires websockets which don't work reliably through `kubectl port-forward` tunnels. NodePort provides direct access without websocket connectivity issues.

==== Set up port forwarding for other services

For Spark Jupyter Notebook and Redpanda Console, use port forwarding:

[,bash]
----
kubectl port-forward deploy/spark-iceberg 8888:8888 --namespace iceberg-lab &
kubectl port-forward svc/redpanda-console 8080:8080 --namespace iceberg-lab &
----

You can run these commands in separate terminals, or run them in the background by appending `&` as shown above.

This way, all port-forward processes will run in the background in the same terminal. You can bring them to the foreground with `fg` or stop them with `kill` if needed.

== Create and validate Iceberg topics

You can validate your setup by performing the following steps:

. Alias the Redpanda CLI:
+
[source,bash]
----
alias internal-rpk="kubectl --namespace iceberg-lab exec -i -t redpanda-0 -c redpanda -- rpk"
----
+
This command allows you to run `rpk` commands directly against the Redpanda broker in the `iceberg-lab` namespace using the `internal-rpk` alias. You can also use `kubectl exec -i -t redpanda-0 -c redpanda -- rpk` directly if you prefer not to set an alias.

. Create Iceberg topics:
+
[source,bash]
----
internal-rpk topic create key_value --topic-config=redpanda.iceberg.mode=key_value
----

. Produce sample data:
+
[source,bash]
----
echo "hello world" | internal-rpk topic produce key_value --format='%k %v\n'
----

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080/topics to see that the topics exist in Redpanda.

. Open MinIO at http://localhost:32090 to view your data stored in the S3-compatible object store.
+
Login credentials:
+
- Username: minio
- Password: minio123

. Open the Jupyter Notebook server at http://localhost:8888. The notebook guides you through querying the Iceberg table created from your Redpanda topic.

== Clean up

When you're finished with the lab, you can clean up the resources:

. Stop all port forwarding processes:
+
[,bash]
----
pkill -f "kubectl port-forward"
----
+
You can also use kbd:[Ctrl+C] if the port forwarding is running in the foreground.

. Delete the MinIO NodePort service:
+
[,bash]
----
kubectl delete service minio-nodeport -n iceberg-lab
----

. Delete the kind cluster (this removes everything):
+
[,bash]
----
kind delete cluster
----

Or, if you want to keep the cluster but remove just the lab resources:

[,bash]
----
# Delete the namespace (removes all lab resources)
kubectl delete namespace iceberg-lab

# Delete the MinIO operator
kubectl delete -k "github.com/minio/operator?ref=v5.0.18"

# Delete cert-manager
helm uninstall cert-manager --namespace cert-manager
kubectl delete namespace cert-manager
----

== Troubleshoot

=== Redpanda bucket access errors

If Redpanda logs show `bucket not found` errors after setup:

. Verify the bucket exists:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl exec -n iceberg-lab iceberg-minio-pool-0-0 -c minio -- mc ls local/
----

. Check Redpanda can reach MinIO:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl exec -n iceberg-lab redpanda-0 -c redpanda -- curl -I http://iceberg-minio-hl.iceberg-lab.svc.cluster.local:9000/redpanda
----

=== Iceberg REST catalog 500 errors

If the Iceberg REST catalog shows `UnknownHostException` errors in the logs:

. Check the catalog logs for DNS resolution errors:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl logs -n iceberg-lab deployment/iceberg-rest | grep -i "unknownhost\|resolve"
----

. If you see errors like `UnknownHostException: redpanda.iceberg-minio-hl...`, this indicates the S3 client is using bucket-style URLs that aren't valid DNS names in Kubernetes.

. Verify the hostAliases configuration is correct:
+
[source,bash]
----
# Get the MinIO pod IP
MINIO_IP=$(kubectl get pod iceberg-minio-pool-0-0 -n iceberg-lab -o jsonpath='{.status.podIP}')
echo "MinIO IP: $MINIO_IP"

# Check if the REST catalog deployment has the correct hostAliases
kubectl get deployment iceberg-rest -n iceberg-lab -o yaml | grep -A 10 hostAliases
----

. If the MinIO Pod IP has changed, update the hostAliases in the REST catalog deployment:
+
[source,bash]
----
# Update the IP in rest-catalog.yaml and reapply
./deploy-iceberg-rest-catalog.sh
kubectl rollout status deployment/iceberg-rest -n iceberg-lab
----

== Suggested reading

- https://min.io/docs/minio/kubernetes/upstream/operations/installation.html[MinIO Kubernetes Operator installation]
- https://min.io/docs/minio/kubernetes/upstream/operations/install-deploy-manage/deploy-minio-tenant-helm.html#deploy-tenant-helm[Deploy MinIO tenant with Helm]
- xref:manage:iceberg/about-iceberg-topics.adoc[Iceberg Topics in Redpanda]

Commit message:

Use init container to simplify lab

kubernetes/iceberg/README.adoc, after:

= Iceberg Streaming Lab on Kubernetes with Redpanda, MinIO, and Spark
:env-kubernetes: true
:description: Pair Redpanda with MinIO for Tiered Storage and write data in the Iceberg format to enable seamless analytics workflows on data in Redpanda topics.
:page-layout: lab

This lab provides a local Kubernetes environment to help you quickly get started with Redpanda and its integration with Apache Iceberg. It showcases how Redpanda, when paired with a Tiered Storage solution like MinIO, can write data in the Iceberg format, enabling seamless analytics workflows. The lab also includes a Spark environment configured for querying the Iceberg tables using SQL within a Jupyter Notebook interface.

In this setup, you will:

- Produce data to Redpanda topics that are Iceberg-enabled.
- Observe how Redpanda writes this data in Iceberg format to MinIO as the Tiered Storage backend.
- Use Spark to query the Iceberg tables, demonstrating a complete pipeline from data production to querying.

This environment is ideal for experimenting with Redpanda's Iceberg and Tiered Storage capabilities, enabling you to test end-to-end workflows for analytics and data lake architectures.

== Prerequisites

=== System requirements

Make sure you have the following system requirements:

* **Operating System**: macOS, Linux, or Windows with WSL2
* **CPU**: Minimum 4 cores
* **Memory**: Minimum 8 GB RAM
* **Storage**: Minimum 20 GB free disk space for Docker images and data
* **Docker**: At least 6 GB memory allocation for Docker Desktop

=== Required tools

Install the following tools:

* https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/[Docker] (with sufficient memory allocation)
* https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/[kind] (Kubernetes in Docker)
* https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/[kubectl] (Kubernetes CLI)
* https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/[Helm] (Kubernetes package manager)


== Run the lab

Follow these steps to set up the lab environment:

=== Clone the repository

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
cd redpanda-labs/kubernetes/iceberg
----

=== Create the Kubernetes cluster and namespace

[source,bash]
----
kind create cluster --config kind.yaml
kubectl create namespace iceberg-lab
----

=== Configure Redpanda for Iceberg

Configuration for Redpanda is provided in `configmap.yaml` and `secret.yaml`. This sets up the necessary configurations for Iceberg topics and Tiered Storage.

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f configmap.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
kubectl apply -f secret.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
----

=== Deploy MinIO

. Deploy the MinIO Operator:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -k "github.com/minio/operator?ref=v5.0.18"
----

. Wait for the MinIO Operator to be ready:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl wait --for=condition=available deployment --all --namespace minio-operator --timeout=120s
----

. Create a MinIO instance:
+
[source,bash]
----
helm repo add minio-operator https://operator.min.io
helm repo update
helm upgrade --install iceberg-minio minio-operator/tenant \
  --namespace iceberg-lab \
  --version 7.1.1 \
  --values minio-tenant-values.yaml
----

. Wait for the MinIO instance to be ready:
+
[source,bash]
----
sleep 10 && kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod -l v1.min.io/tenant=iceberg-minio --namespace iceberg-lab --timeout=300s
----
+
If you see `error: no matching resources found`, it means the MinIO Operator has not yet created the Pods. Wait a few moments and try the command again.

=== Set up MinIO bucket and permissions

This step creates a job that sets up the MinIO bucket and permissions required for Redpanda to access the object store.

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f minio-setup-job.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
kubectl wait --for=condition=complete job/minio-setup --namespace iceberg-lab --timeout=60s
----

If the job times out, check the logs with `kubectl logs job/minio-setup --namespace iceberg-lab iceberg-lab`. If you see `400 Bad Request` errors, MinIO might have reverted to TLS mode. See the <<troubleshoot, troubleshooting section>>.

=== Deploy the Iceberg REST catalog

This step deploys the Iceberg REST catalog, which allows you to interact with Iceberg tables over HTTP. It uses an init container approach to automatically resolve DNS issues with bucket-style S3 URLs.

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f iceberg-rest.yaml
kubectl wait --for=condition=available deployment/iceberg-rest --namespace iceberg-lab --timeout=120s
----

=== Prepare Spark

. Label and taint your dedicated Spark worker node:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl label node kind-worker node-role.kubernetes.io/spark-node=true
kubectl taint nodes kind-worker dedicated=spark:NoSchedule
----

. Build and load the Spark Docker image:
+
[source,bash]
----
docker build -t spark-iceberg-jupyter:latest ./spark
kind load docker-image spark-iceberg-jupyter:latest --name kind --nodes kind-worker
----
+
This step builds the Spark image with Kubernetes-specific configurations for Iceberg and uploads it to the kind cluster. The Dockerfile automatically detects your system architecture (ARM64 or x86_64) and downloads the appropriate dependencies.
+
Wait for the build to complete and the image to be loaded into the kind cluster.

. Verify the image is loaded:
+
[source,bash]
----
docker exec -it kind-worker crictl images | grep spark-iceberg-jupyter
----
+
You should see output similar to the following:
+
[role="no-copy no-wrap"]
----
docker.io/library/spark-iceberg-jupyter    latest      86f20b1213dd3    3.83GB
----

. Deploy Spark:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f spark.yaml
kubectl wait --for=condition=available deployment/spark-iceberg --namespace iceberg-lab --timeout=120s
----

=== Deploy Redpanda

[source,bash]
----
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm repo add redpanda https://charts.redpanda.com
helm repo update

helm install cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager \
  --set crds.enabled=true \
  --namespace cert-manager \
  --create-namespace \
  --version 1.17.4

echo "Deploying Redpanda (this may take a few minutes)"
helm upgrade --install redpanda redpanda/redpanda \
  --namespace iceberg-lab \
  --version 5.9.25 \
  --values redpanda-values.yaml
----

Wait for the Redpanda cluster to be ready:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl --namespace iceberg-lab rollout status statefulset redpanda --watch
----

When the Redpanda cluster is ready, the output should look similar to the following:

[.no-copy]
----
statefulset rolling update complete 3 pods at revision redpanda-8654f645b4...
----

=== Expose services

In this step, you set up access to the MinIO UI, Spark Jupyter Notebook, and Redpanda Console.

==== Set up MinIO console access

For reliable access to the MinIO console, create a NodePort service:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f minio-nodeport.yaml --namespace iceberg-lab
----

The NodePort service exposes MinIO console on port 32090 of all cluster nodes. In a kind cluster, you can access it directly at: http://localhost:32090

NOTE: This approach avoids the known port-forwarding issues with MinIO console (see https://github.com/minio/object-browser/issues/2539[issue #2539]). The MinIO Console UI requires websockets which don't work reliably through `kubectl port-forward` tunnels. NodePort provides direct access without websocket connectivity issues.

==== Set up port forwarding for other services

For Spark Jupyter Notebook and Redpanda Console, use port forwarding:

[,bash]
----
kubectl port-forward deploy/spark-iceberg 8888:8888 --namespace iceberg-lab &
kubectl port-forward svc/redpanda-console 8080:8080 --namespace iceberg-lab &
----

You can run these commands in separate terminals, or run them in the background by appending `&` as shown above.

This way, all port-forward processes will run in the background in the same terminal. You can bring them to the foreground with `fg` or stop them with `kill` if needed.

== Create and validate Iceberg topics

You can validate your setup by performing the following steps:

. Alias the Redpanda CLI:
+
[source,bash]
----
alias internal-rpk="kubectl --namespace iceberg-lab exec -i -t redpanda-0 -c redpanda -- rpk"
----
+
This command allows you to run `rpk` commands directly against the Redpanda broker in the `iceberg-lab` namespace using the `internal-rpk` alias. You can also use `kubectl exec -i -t redpanda-0 -c redpanda -- rpk` directly if you prefer not to set an alias.

. Create Iceberg topics:
+
[source,bash]
----
internal-rpk topic create key_value --topic-config=redpanda.iceberg.mode=key_value
----

. Produce sample data:
+
[source,bash]
----
echo "hello world" | internal-rpk topic produce key_value --format='%k %v\n'
----

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080/topics to see that the topics exist in Redpanda.

. Open MinIO at http://localhost:32090 to view your data stored in the S3-compatible object store.
+
Login credentials:
+
- Username: minio
- Password: minio123

. Open the Jupyter Notebook server at http://localhost:8888. The notebook guides you through querying the Iceberg table created from your Redpanda topic.

== Clean up

When you're finished with the lab, you can clean up the resources:

. Stop all port forwarding processes:
+
[,bash]
----
pkill -f "kubectl port-forward"
----
+
You can also use kbd:[Ctrl+C] if the port forwarding is running in the foreground.

. Delete the MinIO NodePort service:
+
[,bash]
----
kubectl delete service minio-nodeport -n iceberg-lab
----

. Delete the kind cluster (this removes everything):
+
[,bash]
----
kind delete cluster
----

Or, if you want to keep the cluster but remove just the lab resources:

[,bash]
----
# Delete the namespace (removes all lab resources)
kubectl delete namespace iceberg-lab

# Delete the MinIO operator
kubectl delete -k "github.com/minio/operator?ref=v5.0.18"

# Delete cert-manager
helm uninstall cert-manager --namespace cert-manager
kubectl delete namespace cert-manager
----

== Troubleshoot

=== Redpanda bucket access errors

If Redpanda logs show `bucket not found` errors after setup:

. Verify the bucket exists:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl exec -n iceberg-lab iceberg-minio-pool-0-0 -c minio -- mc ls local/
----

. Check Redpanda can reach MinIO:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl exec -n iceberg-lab redpanda-0 -c redpanda -- curl -I http://iceberg-minio-hl.iceberg-lab.svc.cluster.local:9000/redpanda
----

=== Iceberg REST catalog 500 errors

If the Iceberg REST catalog shows `UnknownHostException` errors in the logs:

. Check the catalog logs for DNS resolution errors:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl logs -n iceberg-lab deployment/iceberg-rest | grep -i "unknownhost\|resolve"
----

. If you see errors, check the init container logs to see if DNS resolution failed:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl logs -n iceberg-lab deployment/iceberg-rest -c dns-resolver
----

. The init container automatically resolves MinIO's IP and configures DNS mappings. If MinIO pods restart and get new IPs, restart the Iceberg REST catalog:
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl rollout restart deployment/iceberg-rest -n iceberg-lab
kubectl rollout status deployment/iceberg-rest -n iceberg-lab
----

== Suggested reading

- https://min.io/docs/minio/kubernetes/upstream/operations/installation.html[MinIO Kubernetes Operator installation]
- https://min.io/docs/minio/kubernetes/upstream/operations/install-deploy-manage/deploy-minio-tenant-helm.html#deploy-tenant-helm[Deploy MinIO tenant with Helm]
- xref:manage:iceberg/about-iceberg-topics.adoc[Iceberg Topics in Redpanda]
