docker-compose/cdc/postgres-json/README.adoc, before:

= Set Up Postgres CDC with Debezium and Redpanda
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Integration
:description: Use Debezium to capture the changes made to a Postgres database in real time and stream them to Redpanda.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-console-version: 2.7.2
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.2.7
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]
ifndef::env-site[]
:imagesdir: ../../docs/modules/docker-compose/images/
endif::[]

This example demonstrates using Debezium to capture the changes made to Postgres in real time and stream them to Redpanda.

This ready-to-run `docker-compose` setup contains the following containers:

- `postgres` container with the `pandashop` database, containing a single table, `orders`
- `debezium` container capturing changes made to the `orders` table in real time.
- `redpanda` container to ingest change data streams produced by `debezium`

For more information about `pandashop` schema, see the `/data/postgres_bootstrap.sql` file.

image::postgres-architecture.png[Example architecture]

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/cdc/postgres-json/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/cdc/postgres-json
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```
+
When the `postgres` container starts, the `/data/postgres_bootstrap.sql` file creates the `pandashop` database and the `orders` table, followed by seeding the ` orders` table with a few records.

. Log into Postgres:
+
```sql
docker compose exec postgres psql -U postgresuser -d pandashop
```

. Check the content inside the `orders` table:
+
```sql
select * from orders;
```
+
This is the source table.

. While Debezium is up and running, create a source connector configuration to extract change data feeds from Postgres:
+
```bash
docker compose exec debezium curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' debezium:8083/connectors --data '
{
  "name": "postgres-connector",
  "config": {
    "connector.class": "io.debezium.connector.postgresql.PostgresConnector",
    "plugin.name": "pgoutput",
    "database.hostname": "postgres",
    "database.port": "5432",
    "database.user": "postgresuser",
    "database.password": "postgrespw",
    "database.dbname" : "pandashop",
    "database.server.name": "postgres",
    "table.include.list": "public.orders",
    "topic.prefix" : "dbz"
  }
}'
```
+
Notice the `database.*` configurations specifying the connectivity details to `postgres` container. Wait a minute or two until the connector gets deployed inside Debezium and creates the initial snapshot of change log topics in Redpanda.

. Check the list of change log topics in Redpanda:
+
```bash
docker compose exec redpanda rpk topic list
```
+
The output should contain two topics with the prefix `dbz.*` specified in the connector configuration. The topic `dbz.public.orders` holds the initial snapshot of change log events streamed from `orders` table.
+
[.no-copy]
----
NAME               PARTITIONS  REPLICAS
connect-status     5           1
connect_configs    1           1
connect_offsets    25          1
dbz.public.orders  1           1
----

. Monitor for change events by consuming the `dbz.public.orders` topic:
+
```bash
docker compose exec redpanda rpk topic consume dbz.public.orders
```

. While the consumer is running, open another terminal to insert a record to the `orders` table:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
docker compose exec postgres psql -U postgresuser -d pandashop
----

. Insert the following record:
+
```sql
INSERT INTO orders (customer_id, total) values (5, 500);
```

This will trigger a change event in Debezium, immediately publishing it to `dbz.public.orders` Redpanda topic, causing the consumer to display a new event in the console. That proves the end to end functionality of your CDC pipeline.

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```

== Next steps

Now that you have change log events ingested into Redpanda. You process change log events to enable use cases such as:

- Database replication
- Stream processing applications
- Streaming ETL pipelines
- Update caches
- Event-driven Microservices

Commit message:

Callout WSL is required for Windows (#270)

docker-compose/cdc/postgres-json/README.adoc, after:

= Set Up Postgres CDC with Debezium and Redpanda
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Integration
:description: Use Debezium to capture the changes made to a Postgres database in real time and stream them to Redpanda.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-console-version: 2.7.2
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.2.7
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]
ifndef::env-site[]
:imagesdir: ../../docs/modules/docker-compose/images/
endif::[]

This example demonstrates using Debezium to capture the changes made to Postgres in real time and stream them to Redpanda.

This ready-to-run `docker-compose` setup contains the following containers:

- `postgres` container with the `pandashop` database, containing a single table, `orders`
- `debezium` container capturing changes made to the `orders` table in real time.
- `redpanda` container to ingest change data streams produced by `debezium`

For more information about `pandashop` schema, see the `/data/postgres_bootstrap.sql` file.

image::postgres-architecture.png[Example architecture]

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

This lab is intended for Linux and macOS users. If you are using Windows, you must use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run the commands in this lab.

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/cdc/postgres-json/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/cdc/postgres-json
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```
+
When the `postgres` container starts, the `/data/postgres_bootstrap.sql` file creates the `pandashop` database and the `orders` table, followed by seeding the ` orders` table with a few records.

. Log into Postgres:
+
```sql
docker compose exec postgres psql -U postgresuser -d pandashop
```

. Check the content inside the `orders` table:
+
```sql
select * from orders;
```
+
This is the source table.

. While Debezium is up and running, create a source connector configuration to extract change data feeds from Postgres:
+
```bash
docker compose exec debezium curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' debezium:8083/connectors --data '
{
  "name": "postgres-connector",
  "config": {
    "connector.class": "io.debezium.connector.postgresql.PostgresConnector",
    "plugin.name": "pgoutput",
    "database.hostname": "postgres",
    "database.port": "5432",
    "database.user": "postgresuser",
    "database.password": "postgrespw",
    "database.dbname" : "pandashop",
    "database.server.name": "postgres",
    "table.include.list": "public.orders",
    "topic.prefix" : "dbz"
  }
}'
```
+
Notice the `database.*` configurations specifying the connectivity details to `postgres` container. Wait a minute or two until the connector gets deployed inside Debezium and creates the initial snapshot of change log topics in Redpanda.

. Check the list of change log topics in Redpanda:
+
```bash
docker compose exec redpanda rpk topic list
```
+
The output should contain two topics with the prefix `dbz.*` specified in the connector configuration. The topic `dbz.public.orders` holds the initial snapshot of change log events streamed from `orders` table.
+
[.no-copy]
----
NAME               PARTITIONS  REPLICAS
connect-status     5           1
connect_configs    1           1
connect_offsets    25          1
dbz.public.orders  1           1
----

. Monitor for change events by consuming the `dbz.public.orders` topic:
+
```bash
docker compose exec redpanda rpk topic consume dbz.public.orders
```

. While the consumer is running, open another terminal to insert a record to the `orders` table:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
docker compose exec postgres psql -U postgresuser -d pandashop
----

. Insert the following record:
+
```sql
INSERT INTO orders (customer_id, total) values (5, 500);
```

This will trigger a change event in Debezium, immediately publishing it to `dbz.public.orders` Redpanda topic, causing the consumer to display a new event in the console. That proves the end to end functionality of your CDC pipeline.

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```

== Next steps

Now that you have change log events ingested into Redpanda. You process change log events to enable use cases such as:

- Database replication
- Stream processing applications
- Streaming ETL pipelines
- Update caches
- Event-driven Microservices
