docker-compose/iceberg/README.adoc, before:

////
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
 or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
 distributed with this work for additional information
 regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
 to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
 "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
 with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
 software distributed under the License is distributed on an
 "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
 KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
 specific language governing permissions and limitations
 under the License.
////
= Redpanda Iceberg Docker Compose Example
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Iceberg, Tiered Storage, Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration
:description: Pair Redpanda with MinIO for Tiered Storage and write data in the Iceberg format to enable seamless analytics workflows on data in Redpanda topics.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.3.5
:latest-console-version: 3.0.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This lab provides a Docker Compose environment to help you quickly get started with Redpanda and its integration with Apache Iceberg. It showcases how Redpanda, when paired with a Tiered Storage solution like MinIO, can write data in the Iceberg format, enabling seamless analytics workflows. The lab also includes a Spark environment configured for querying the Iceberg tables using SQL within a Jupyter Notebook interface.

In this setup, you will:

- Produce data to Redpanda topics that are Iceberg-enabled.
- Observe how Redpanda writes this data in Iceberg format to MinIO as the Tiered Storage backend.
- Use Spark to query the Iceberg tables, demonstrating a complete pipeline from data production to querying.

This environment is ideal for experimenting with Redpanda's Iceberg and Tiered Storage capabilities, enabling you to test end-to-end workflows for analytics and data lake architectures.

== Prerequisites

You must have the following installed on your machine:

- https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose]

- https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/rpk-install/[`rpk`]

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/iceberg/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/iceberg
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to at least version 24.3.1. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
NOTE: You must use at least version v3.0.0 of Redpanda Console to deploy this lab.
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION=v{latest-console-version}
----

. Start the Docker Compose environment, which includes Redpanda, MinIO, Spark, and Jupyter Notebook:
+
```bash
docker compose build && docker compose up
```

. Create and switch to a new `rpk` profile that connects to your Redpanda broker:
+
```bash
rpk profile create docker-compose-iceberg --set=admin_api.addresses=localhost:19644 --set=brokers=localhost:19092 --set=schema_registry.addresses=localhost:18081
```

. Create two topics with Iceberg enabled:
+
```bash
rpk topic create key_value --topic-config=redpanda.iceberg.mode=key_value
rpk topic create value_schema_id_prefix --topic-config=redpanda.iceberg.mode=value_schema_id_prefix
```

. Produce data to the `key_value` topic and see data show up.
+
```bash
echo "hello world" | rpk topic produce key_value --format='%k %v\n'
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8081/topics to see that the topics exist in Redpanda.

. Open MinIO at http://localhost:9001/browser to view your data stored in the S3-compatible object store.
+
Login credentials:
+
- Username: `minio`
- Password: `minio123`

. Open the Jupyter Notebook server at http://localhost:8888. The notebook guides you through querying Iceberg tables created from Redpanda topics.

. Create a schema in the Schema Registry:
+
```bash
rpk registry schema create value_schema_id_prefix-value --schema schema.avsc
```

. Produce data to the `value_schema_id_prefix` topic:
+
```bash
echo '{"user_id":2324,"event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK","ts":"2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z"}\n{"user_id":3333,"event_type":"SCROLL","ts":"2024-11-25T20:24:14.774Z"}\n{"user_id":7272,"event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK","ts":"2024-11-25T20:24:34.552Z"}' | rpk topic produce value_schema_id_prefix --format='%v\n' --schema-id=topic
```

When the data is committed, it should be available in Iceberg format and you can query the table `lab.redpanda.value_schema_id_prefix` in the http://localhost:8888[Jupyter Notebook].

== Alternative query interfaces

While the notebook server is running, you can query Iceberg tables directly using Spark's CLI tools, Instead of Jupyter Notebook:

.Spark Shell
```bash
docker exec -it spark-iceberg spark-shell
```

.Spark SQL
```bash
docker exec -it spark-iceberg spark-sql
```

.PySpark
```bash
docker exec -it spark-iceberg pyspark
```

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

[,bash]
----
docker compose down -v
----

Commit message:

Pin minio/mc and update spark version (#264)
* pin minio/mc and update spark version

* three changes:
1. set minio/mc image to same version used in other repos
2. change `mc config host add` to `mc alias set`
3. change `mc policy set` to `mc anonymous set download`

* add note mentioning proper order of steps

docker-compose/iceberg/README.adoc, after:

////
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
 or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
 distributed with this work for additional information
 regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
 to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
 "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
 with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
 software distributed under the License is distributed on an
 "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
 KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
 specific language governing permissions and limitations
 under the License.
////
= Redpanda Iceberg Docker Compose Example
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Iceberg, Tiered Storage, Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration
:description: Pair Redpanda with MinIO for Tiered Storage and write data in the Iceberg format to enable seamless analytics workflows on data in Redpanda topics.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.3.5
:latest-console-version: 3.0.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This lab provides a Docker Compose environment to help you quickly get started with Redpanda and its integration with Apache Iceberg. It showcases how Redpanda, when paired with a Tiered Storage solution like MinIO, can write data in the Iceberg format, enabling seamless analytics workflows. The lab also includes a Spark environment configured for querying the Iceberg tables using SQL within a Jupyter Notebook interface.

In this setup, you will:

- Produce data to Redpanda topics that are Iceberg-enabled.
- Observe how Redpanda writes this data in Iceberg format to MinIO as the Tiered Storage backend.
- Use Spark to query the Iceberg tables, demonstrating a complete pipeline from data production to querying.

This environment is ideal for experimenting with Redpanda's Iceberg and Tiered Storage capabilities, enabling you to test end-to-end workflows for analytics and data lake architectures.

== Prerequisites

You must have the following installed on your machine:

- https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose]

- https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/rpk-install/[`rpk`]

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/iceberg/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/iceberg
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to at least version 24.3.1. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
NOTE: You must use at least version v3.0.0 of Redpanda Console to deploy this lab.
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION=v{latest-console-version}
----

. Start the Docker Compose environment, which includes Redpanda, MinIO, Spark, and Jupyter Notebook:
+
```bash
docker compose build && docker compose up
```

. Create and switch to a new `rpk` profile that connects to your Redpanda broker:
+
```bash
rpk profile create docker-compose-iceberg --set=admin_api.addresses=localhost:19644 --set=brokers=localhost:19092 --set=schema_registry.addresses=localhost:18081
```

. Create two topics with Iceberg enabled:
+
```bash
rpk topic create key_value --topic-config=redpanda.iceberg.mode=key_value
rpk topic create value_schema_id_prefix --topic-config=redpanda.iceberg.mode=value_schema_id_prefix
```

. Produce data to the `key_value` topic and see data show up.
+
```bash
echo "hello world" | rpk topic produce key_value --format='%k %v\n'
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8081/topics to see that the topics exist in Redpanda.

. Open MinIO at http://localhost:9001/browser to view your data stored in the S3-compatible object store.
+
Login credentials:
+
- Username: `minio`
- Password: `minio123`

. Open the Jupyter Notebook server at http://localhost:8888. The notebook guides you through querying Iceberg tables created from Redpanda topics. Complete the next two steps first before running the code in the notebook.

. Create a schema in the Schema Registry:
+
```bash
rpk registry schema create value_schema_id_prefix-value --schema schema.avsc
```

. Produce data to the `value_schema_id_prefix` topic:
+
```bash
echo '{"user_id":2324,"event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK","ts":"2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z"}\n{"user_id":3333,"event_type":"SCROLL","ts":"2024-11-25T20:24:14.774Z"}\n{"user_id":7272,"event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK","ts":"2024-11-25T20:24:34.552Z"}' | rpk topic produce value_schema_id_prefix --format='%v\n' --schema-id=topic
```

When the data is committed, it should be available in Iceberg format and you can query the table `lab.redpanda.value_schema_id_prefix` in the http://localhost:8888[Jupyter Notebook].

== Alternative query interfaces

While the notebook server is running, you can query Iceberg tables directly using Spark's CLI tools, Instead of Jupyter Notebook:

.Spark Shell
```bash
docker exec -it spark-iceberg spark-shell
```

.Spark SQL
```bash
docker exec -it spark-iceberg spark-sql
```

.PySpark
```bash
docker exec -it spark-iceberg pyspark
```

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

[,bash]
----
docker compose down -v
----
