clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs/README.adoc, before:

= Build a Chat Room Application with Redpanda Cloud and Node.js
:description: Create a basic chat room application with Redpanda Cloud and Kafka clients developed with kafkajs.
:page-context-links: [{"name": "Docker", "to": "redpanda-labs:clients:docker-nodejs.adoc" },{"name": "Cloud", "to": "redpanda-labs:clients:cloud-nodejs.adoc" } ]
:page-cloud: true
:page-categories: Development, Clients
:page-layout: lab
:page-aliases: 23.3@ROOT:develop:guide-nodejs-cloud.adoc
// Set the path to content in this lab for both the docs site and the local GitHub README
:content-url: ./
ifdef::env-site[]
:content-url: https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs/blob/main/clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs/
endif::[]
ifndef::env-site[]
:imagesdir: ../../../docs/modules/clients/images/
endif::[]

Create a basic chat room application with Redpanda Cloud and Kafka clients developed with https://kafka.js.org/[kafkajs^].

This tutorial describes how to:

* Start a Redpanda cluster to store and stream chat room messages.
* Write a client application in TypeScript to produce and consume chat room messages.
* Build and run multiple clients to exchange chat messages streamed through Redpanda Cloud.

image::chat-room.gif[Demo of the application, where two users are chatting to each other]

== What is a chat room application?

A chat room application is software that enables users to engage in real-time textual communication with one another. These applications typically allow multiple users to join a chat room, where they can send messages and interact with others in a group conversation.

Chat room applications often include features such as private messaging, user profiles, and notifications. Some popular chat room applications include Slack, Discord, and WhatsApp.

== Why use Redpanda?

Redpanda offers several features that make it ideal for building a fast, scalable, and robust chat room application.

* Scalability: Redpanda can scale horizontally and vertically to accommodate growing chat room usage over time.
* Low-latency: Redpanda is designed for minimal latency to provide a smooth user experience and fast message delivery.
* Fault tolerance: Redpanda is resilient to failures, thanks to its built-in replication and partitioning capabilities. This built-in resilience ensures that the chat room application continues to serve users even if individual brokers in the cluster experience downtime.
* Durability: Redpanda persists messages on disk, maintaining chat history and allowing users to read previous conversations.

== Prerequisites

- https://nodejs.org/en/download/package-manager/[Install Node.js for your platform^].

- Complete the link:https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/quick-start-cloud/[Redpanda Cloud Quickstart] before continuing. This tutorial expands on the quickstart.

NOTE: Redpanda Cloud uses TLS certificates signed by https://letsencrypt.org/[Let's Encrypt^]. Most programming languages will load their root certificate authority (CA), `ISRG Root X1`, by default so you shouldn't need to provide a custom CA certificate.

== Run the lab

Build the client chat application, run it from multiple client terminals, and chat between the clients.

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the example directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs
----

. Install the required dependencies:
+
[,bash]
----
npm i
----

. From `chat-room/`, build the client application:
+
[,bash]
----
node_modules/typescript/bin/tsc src/index.ts
----

. Open the TypeScript files and replace the placeholders wrapped in angle brackets (`<>`) with the same values that you used in the Redpanda Cloud Quickstart.

. Verify that the `chat-room` topic exists in your cluster by listing all topics:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic list --tls-enabled
----
+
Output:
+
[.no-copy]
----
NAME       PARTITIONS  REPLICAS
chat-room  1           1
----

. If the topic doesn't exist yet, use link:https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/rpk/[`rpk`] to create a `chat-room` topic:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic create chat-room --tls-enabled
----
+
Output:
+
[.no-copy]
----
TOPIC      STATUS
chat-room  OK
----

. Open at least two terminals, and for each terminal:
.. Run the client application:
+
[,bash]
----
node src/index.js
----
.. When prompted with `Enter user name:`, enter a unique name for the chat room.
. Use the chat application: enter a message in a terminal, and verify that the message is received in the other terminals.
+
For example:
+
----
Enter user name:
Alice
Connected, press Ctrl+C to exit
Alice: Hi, I'm Alice
Bob: Hi Alice, I'm Bob, nice to meet you
----

== Files in the example

This example includes the following files:

- link:{content-url}src/admin.ts[`sr/admin.ts`]: Checks whether the `chat-room` topic exists and creates it if not.
+
NOTE: The broker settings in this code are from the Redpanda Quickstart, where the external port for broker `redpanda` is set to port 19092.
- link:{content-url}src/producer.ts[`src/producer.ts`]: A producer that sends strings entered by the user of the terminal to the `chat-room` topic. Messages are sent as JSON encoded strings.
- link:{content-url}src/consumer.ts[`src/consumer.ts`]: A consumer that reads all messages from the `chat-room`
topic and prints them to the console. You can start as many consumer groups as you like, but each group reads a message only once, which is why the example is using a generated UUID for the group ID. This way, each time you run the application, you see all previous messages.
+
NOTE: Because the `eachMessage()` function automatically commits on a heartbeat interval, there is no `commit()` method or auto-commit configuration in the code.
- link:{content-url}src/index.ts[`src/index.ts`]: The client application that creates the topic, producer, and consumer and implements the chat logic.

== Next steps

This is a basic example of a chat room application. You can improve this application by implementing additional features and components, such as:

* A user interface to make it more interactive and user-friendly.
* A user registration and login system to authenticate users before they can access the chat room.
* Rate limiting and other measures to prevent spamming and abuse in the chat room.

== Suggested reading

For additional resources to help you build stream processing
applications that can aggregate, join, and filter your data streams, see:

* https://university.redpanda.com/[Redpanda University^]
* https://redpanda.com/blog[Redpanda Blog^]
* https://redpanda.com/resources[Resources^]

Commit message:

Clarify that users need to edit the src files (#269)

clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs/README.adoc, after:

= Build a Chat Room Application with Redpanda Cloud and Node.js
:description: Create a basic chat room application with Redpanda Cloud and Kafka clients developed with kafkajs.
:page-context-links: [{"name": "Docker", "to": "redpanda-labs:clients:docker-nodejs.adoc" },{"name": "Cloud", "to": "redpanda-labs:clients:cloud-nodejs.adoc" } ]
:page-cloud: true
:page-categories: Development, Clients
:page-layout: lab
:page-aliases: 23.3@ROOT:develop:guide-nodejs-cloud.adoc
// Set the path to content in this lab for both the docs site and the local GitHub README
:content-url: ./
ifdef::env-site[]
:content-url: https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs/blob/main/clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs/
endif::[]
ifndef::env-site[]
:imagesdir: ../../../docs/modules/clients/images/
endif::[]

Create a basic chat room application with Redpanda Cloud and Kafka clients developed with https://kafka.js.org/[kafkajs^].

This tutorial describes how to:

* Start a Redpanda cluster to store and stream chat room messages.
* Write a client application in TypeScript to produce and consume chat room messages.
* Build and run multiple clients to exchange chat messages streamed through Redpanda Cloud.

image::chat-room.gif[Demo of the application, where two users are chatting to each other]

== What is a chat room application?

A chat room application is software that enables users to engage in real-time textual communication with one another. These applications typically allow multiple users to join a chat room, where they can send messages and interact with others in a group conversation.

Chat room applications often include features such as private messaging, user profiles, and notifications. Some popular chat room applications include Slack, Discord, and WhatsApp.

== Why use Redpanda?

Redpanda offers several features that make it ideal for building a fast, scalable, and robust chat room application.

* Scalability: Redpanda can scale horizontally and vertically to accommodate growing chat room usage over time.
* Low-latency: Redpanda is designed for minimal latency to provide a smooth user experience and fast message delivery.
* Fault tolerance: Redpanda is resilient to failures, thanks to its built-in replication and partitioning capabilities. This built-in resilience ensures that the chat room application continues to serve users even if individual brokers in the cluster experience downtime.
* Durability: Redpanda persists messages on disk, maintaining chat history and allowing users to read previous conversations.

== Prerequisites

- https://nodejs.org/en/download/package-manager/[Install Node.js for your platform^].

- Complete the link:https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/quick-start-cloud/[Redpanda Cloud Quickstart] before continuing. This tutorial expands on the quickstart.

NOTE: Redpanda Cloud uses TLS certificates signed by https://letsencrypt.org/[Let's Encrypt^]. Most programming languages will load their root certificate authority (CA), `ISRG Root X1`, by default so you shouldn't need to provide a custom CA certificate.

== Run the lab

Build the client chat application, run it from multiple client terminals, and chat between the clients.

. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the example directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs
----

. Open the TypeScript files in the `src/` directory (`admin.ts`, `producer.ts`, `consumer.ts`, and `index.ts`) and update the Redpanda connection information:
+
- Replace the placeholders wrapped in angle brackets (`<>`) with your Redpanda Cloud connection details (such as `bootstrap-server-address`, `username`, and `password`). You can find these values in your Redpanda Cloud console.
+
Make sure to save your changes before running the application.

. From the `clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs` directory, install the required dependencies:
+
[,bash]
----
npm i
----

. From the `clients/chat-room/cloud/nodejs` directory, build the client application:
+
[,bash]
----
node_modules/typescript/bin/tsc src/index.ts
----

. Verify that the `chat-room` topic exists in your cluster by listing all topics:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic list --tls-enabled
----
+
Output:
+
[.no-copy]
----
NAME       PARTITIONS  REPLICAS
chat-room  1           1
----

. If the topic doesn't exist yet, use link:https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/rpk/[`rpk`] to create a `chat-room` topic:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic create chat-room --tls-enabled
----
+
Output:
+
[.no-copy]
----
TOPIC      STATUS
chat-room  OK
----

. Open at least two terminals, and for each terminal:
.. Run the client application:
+
[,bash]
----
node src/index.js
----
.. When prompted with `Enter user name:`, enter a unique name for the chat room.
. Use the chat application: enter a message in a terminal, and verify that the message is received in the other terminals.
+
For example:
+
----
Enter user name:
Alice
Connected, press Ctrl+C to exit
Alice: Hi, I'm Alice
Bob: Hi Alice, I'm Bob, nice to meet you
----

== Files in the example

This example includes the following files:

- link:{content-url}src/admin.ts[`sr/admin.ts`]: Checks whether the `chat-room` topic exists and creates it if not.
+
NOTE: The broker settings in this code are from the Redpanda Quickstart, where the external port for broker `redpanda` is set to port 19092.
- link:{content-url}src/producer.ts[`src/producer.ts`]: A producer that sends strings entered by the user of the terminal to the `chat-room` topic. Messages are sent as JSON encoded strings.
- link:{content-url}src/consumer.ts[`src/consumer.ts`]: A consumer that reads all messages from the `chat-room`
topic and prints them to the console. You can start as many consumer groups as you like, but each group reads a message only once, which is why the example is using a generated UUID for the group ID. This way, each time you run the application, you see all previous messages.
+
NOTE: Because the `eachMessage()` function automatically commits on a heartbeat interval, there is no `commit()` method or auto-commit configuration in the code.
- link:{content-url}src/index.ts[`src/index.ts`]: The client application that creates the topic, producer, and consumer and implements the chat logic.

== Next steps

This is a basic example of a chat room application. You can improve this application by implementing additional features and components, such as:

* A user interface to make it more interactive and user-friendly.
* A user registration and login system to authenticate users before they can access the chat room.
* Rate limiting and other measures to prevent spamming and abuse in the chat room.

== Suggested reading

For additional resources to help you build stream processing
applications that can aggregate, join, and filter your data streams, see:

* https://university.redpanda.com/[Redpanda University^]
* https://redpanda.com/blog[Redpanda Blog^]
* https://redpanda.com/resources[Resources^]
