docker-compose/single-broker/README.adoc, before:

= Start a Single Redpanda Broker with Redpanda Console in Docker
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Monitoring, Management, Deployment
:description: Start a single Redpanda broker and Redpanda Console to start developing your application on Redpanda locally.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.2.7
:latest-console-version: 2.7.2
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This Docker Compose example starts a single Redpanda broker and Redpanda Console.

This Docker Compose file is also used in the https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/quick-start/[Redpanda Quickstart].

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

== Run the lab

// For GitHub, provide instructions for cloning the repo.
ifndef::env-site[]
. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/single-broker/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/single-broker
----
endif::[]
// For the docs site, provide a download link since we have symlinked the Docker Compose file into the attachments directory of the Antora structure. See https://docs.antora.org/antora/latest/page/attachments/
ifdef::env-site[]
. xref:redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$single-broker/docker-compose.yml[Download] the following Docker Compose file on your local file system.
+
.Reveal the Docker Compose file
[%collapsible]
====
.`docker-compose.yml`
[,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
include::redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$single-broker/docker-compose.yml[]
----
====
endif::[]

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION=v{latest-console-version}
----

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080[localhost:8080^].

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```

Commit message:

Callout WSL is required for Windows (#270)

docker-compose/single-broker/README.adoc, after:

= Start a Single Redpanda Broker with Redpanda Console in Docker
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Monitoring, Management, Deployment
:description: Start a single Redpanda broker and Redpanda Console to start developing your application on Redpanda locally.
:page-layout: lab
// Set up attributes to hold the latest version of Redpanda and Redpanda Console.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 24.2.7
:latest-console-version: 2.7.2
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]

This Docker Compose example starts a single Redpanda broker and Redpanda Console.

This Docker Compose file is also used in the https://docs.redpanda.com/current/get-started/quick-start/[Redpanda Quickstart].

== Prerequisites

You must have https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose] installed on your host machine.

This lab is intended for Linux and macOS users. If you are using Windows, you must use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run the commands in this lab.

== Run the lab

// For GitHub, provide instructions for cloning the repo.
ifndef::env-site[]
. Clone this repository:
+
```bash
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
```

. Change into the `docker-compose/single-broker/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/single-broker
----
endif::[]
// For the docs site, provide a download link since we have symlinked the Docker Compose file into the attachments directory of the Antora structure. See https://docs.antora.org/antora/latest/page/attachments/
ifdef::env-site[]
. xref:redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$single-broker/docker-compose.yml[Download] the following Docker Compose file on your local file system.
+
.Reveal the Docker Compose file
[%collapsible]
====
.`docker-compose.yml`
[,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
include::redpanda-labs:docker-compose:attachment$single-broker/docker-compose.yml[]
----
====
endif::[]

. Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION=v{latest-redpanda-version}
----

. Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda Console that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases].
+
For example:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION=v{latest-console-version}
----

. Run the following in the directory where you saved the Docker Compose file:
+
```bash
docker compose up -d
```

. Open Redpanda Console at http://localhost:8080[localhost:8080^].

== Clean up

To shut down and delete the containers along with all your cluster data:

```bash
docker compose down -v
```
