docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo/README.adoc, before:

= Migrate Data with Redpanda Migrator
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Migration, Integration, Security
:description: Migrate data, schemas, and consumer offsets from a source Kafka cluster to a target Redpanda cluster using Redpanda Migrator.
:page-layout: lab
:page-topic-type: lab
:personas: streaming_developer, platform_operator, evaluator
// Learning objectives - what readers will explore
:learning-objective-1: Run Redpanda Migrator for continuous data replication between clusters
:learning-objective-2: Explore SASL authentication and ACL-based authorization for secure migration
:learning-objective-3: Observe topic and schema migration with preserved configurations
// CI Test for Redpanda Migrator Demo
// (test start {"id":"redpanda-migrator-demo", "description": "Redpanda Migrator demo CI test"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose down -v 2>/dev/null || true", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo"})
// Set up attributes to hold the latest versions.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 25.3.4
:latest-console-version: 3.4.0
:latest-connect-version: 4.77.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]
ifndef::env-site[]
:imagesdir: ../../docs/modules/docker-compose/images/
endif::[]

This lab demonstrates how to use Redpanda Migrator to migrate data from a source Kafka-compatible cluster to a target Redpanda cluster. Redpanda Migrator is built on Redpanda Connect and provides continuous data replication with automatic topic creation, schema migration, and consumer offset synchronization.

== What you'll explore

In this lab, you will:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== What you will build

This lab creates a complete migration environment with:

* A source cluster (simulating Confluent Kafka) with SASL authentication
* A target Redpanda cluster with matching security configuration
* Redpanda Migrator configured for continuous replication
* Redpanda Console instances for both clusters

The migrator demonstrates:

* Auto topic creation with matching partition counts
* Schema Registry migration with continuous syncing
* Compacted topic migration (preserving cleanup policies)
* Consumer offset migration
* ACL-based security with non-superuser migration patterns

== Prerequisites

* https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose^] installed on your host machine
* At least 4GB RAM available
* `make` (optional, but recommended)

This lab is for Linux and macOS users. If you are using Windows, you must use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run the commands in this lab.

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
[,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
----

. Change into the `docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo
----

. Set the required environment variables for the container versions.
+
Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases^].
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION={latest-redpanda-version}
----
+
Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION={latest-console-version}
----
+
Set the `REDPANDA_CONNECT_VERSION` environment variable for the migrator:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONNECT_VERSION={latest-connect-version}
----

. Start the demo environment:
+
[,bash]
----
make start
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose up -d --wait", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo", "timeout": 300000})
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 10000})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec redpanda-source rpk cluster health", "output": "/Healthy/"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec redpanda-target rpk cluster health", "output": "/Healthy/"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "curl -s http://localhost:4195/ping", "output": "/pong/"})
+
This starts source and target Redpanda clusters, Redpanda Console instances, and the migrator service. See `docker-compose.yml` for port mappings and service details.

. Set up users, ACLs, topics, and schemas:
+
[,bash]
----
make setup
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose exec rpk-client /scripts/setup.sh", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo", "timeout": 180000, "output": "/Secure Setup Complete/"})
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 90000})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec rpk-client rpk topic list --brokers redpanda-source:9092 -X user=admin-user -X pass=admin-secret-password -X sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-256", "output": "/demo-orders/"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "curl -s -u admin-user:admin-secret-password http://localhost:28081/subjects", "output": "/demo-orders-value/"})
+
This creates users with SASL authentication, configures ACLs for secure migration, creates demo topics with various cleanup policies, and registers schemas. See `scripts/setup.sh` for detailed ACL permissions and topic configurations.

. (Optional) Verify the ACL configuration:
+
[,bash]
----
make verify-acls
----
+
This tests that `migrator-user` has correct read-only source access and read-write target access with proper restrictions. See `scripts/verify-acls.sh` for test details.

. Start continuous data production:
+
[,bash]
----
make demo-start
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec rpk-client bash -c 'echo test | rpk topic produce demo-orders --brokers redpanda-source:9092 -X user=admin-user -X pass=admin-secret-password -X sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-256'"})
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 15000})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec rpk-client rpk topic list --brokers redpanda-target:9092 -X user=admin-user -X pass=admin-secret-password -X sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-256", "output": "/demo-orders/"})
+
This starts a background producer that sends approximately 81 messages every 2 seconds across all demo topics.

. Verify continuous schema syncing:
+
[,bash]
----
make verify-continuous-schema
----
+
This test registers a new schema after the migrator starts and confirms it automatically appears in the target Schema Registry within 15 seconds.

. Monitor migration lag:
+
[,bash]
----
make monitor-lag
----
+
This displays a real-time dashboard showing lag per topic, message counts, and production status. Press Ctrl+C to exit.

. When finished, stop continuous production:
+
[,bash]
----
make demo-stop
----

== Verify data consistency

Run the verification script to confirm successful migration:

[,bash]
----
make verify
----

This checks:

* All topics are migrated
* Partition counts match
* Message counts match
* Cleanup policies are preserved
* Schemas are migrated

== Configuration

The migrator uses the principle of least privilege with non-superuser accounts. For detailed security configuration including users, ACLs, and permissions, see:

* `scripts/setup.sh` - User creation and ACL configuration
* `config/migrator-config.yaml` - Migrator settings and Schema Registry sync
* `docker-compose.yml` - Service ports and environment variables

== Clean up

To stop and remove all containers and data:

[,bash]
----
make clean
----

== Troubleshoot

=== Authentication errors

If you see "ILLEGAL_SASL_STATE" errors, run `make setup` to configure SASL authentication.

=== Topics not appearing in target

Check that the migrator is running:

[,bash]
----
docker compose ps migrator
curl http://localhost:4195/ping
----

Check the migrator logs:

[,bash]
----
docker compose logs migrator
----

=== Schemas not migrating

If you see "Subject is not in import mode" errors, enable import mode:

[,bash]
----
curl -X PUT http://localhost:28081/mode \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -u 'admin-user:admin-secret-password' \
  -d '{"mode":"IMPORT"}'
----

Then restart the migrator:

[,bash]
----
docker compose restart migrator
----

== Next steps

After running this demo:

ifndef::env-site[]
* Read the https://docs.redpanda.com/redpanda-connect/cookbooks/redpanda_migrator/[Redpanda Migrator documentation^]
* Learn about https://docs.redpanda.com/current/manage/schema-registry/[Schema Registry^] configuration
* Explore https://docs.redpanda.com/current/manage/security/authentication/[Redpanda authentication^] options
endif::[]
ifdef::env-site[]
* Read the xref:redpanda-connect:cookbooks:redpanda_migrator.adoc[Redpanda Migrator documentation]
* Learn about xref:ROOT:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Schema Registry] configuration
* Explore xref:ROOT:manage:security/authentication.adoc[Redpanda authentication] options
endif::[]
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose down -v", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo"})
// (test end)

Commit message:

Add Redpanda Migrator intro with reference doc link
- Add intro explaining what Redpanda Migrator is
- Include xref for env-site and external link for GitHub
- Link to redpanda_migrator component reference documentation

docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo/README.adoc, after:

= Migrate Data with Redpanda Migrator
:env-docker: true
:page-categories: Migration, Integration, Security
:description: Migrate data, schemas, and consumer offsets from a source Kafka cluster to a target Redpanda cluster using Redpanda Migrator.
:page-layout: lab
:page-topic-type: lab
:personas: streaming_developer, platform_operator, evaluator
// Learning objectives - what readers will explore
:learning-objective-1: Run Redpanda Migrator for continuous data replication between clusters
:learning-objective-2: Explore SASL authentication and ACL-based authorization for secure migration
:learning-objective-3: Observe topic and schema migration with preserved configurations
// CI Test for Redpanda Migrator Demo
// (test start {"id":"redpanda-migrator-demo", "description": "Redpanda Migrator demo CI test"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose down -v 2>/dev/null || true", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo"})
// Set up attributes to hold the latest versions.
// For GitHub, hard-code the latest version to these values:
ifndef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: 25.3.4
:latest-console-version: 3.4.0
:latest-connect-version: 4.77.0
endif::[]
// For the docs site, use the built-in attributes that store the latest version as fetched from GitHub releases.
ifdef::env-site[]
:latest-redpanda-version: {full-version}
// All pages already have access to {latest-console-version} on the docs site.
endif::[]
ifndef::env-site[]
:imagesdir: ../../docs/modules/docker-compose/images/
endif::[]

ifdef::env-site[]
This lab demonstrates how to use xref:redpanda-connect:components:inputs:redpanda_migrator.adoc[Redpanda Migrator] to migrate data from a source Kafka-compatible cluster to a target Redpanda cluster.
endif::[]
ifndef::env-site[]
This lab demonstrates how to use https://docs.redpanda.com/redpanda-connect/components/inputs/redpanda_migrator/[Redpanda Migrator^] to migrate data from a source Kafka-compatible cluster to a target Redpanda cluster.
endif::[]

Redpanda Migrator is built on Redpanda Connect and provides continuous data replication with automatic topic creation, schema migration, and consumer offset synchronization.

== What you'll explore

In this lab, you will:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== What you will build

This lab creates a complete migration environment with:

* A source cluster (simulating Confluent Kafka) with SASL authentication
* A target Redpanda cluster with matching security configuration
* Redpanda Migrator configured for continuous replication
* Redpanda Console instances for both clusters

The migrator demonstrates:

* Auto topic creation with matching partition counts
* Schema Registry migration with continuous syncing
* Compacted topic migration (preserving cleanup policies)
* Consumer offset migration
* ACL-based security with non-superuser migration patterns

== Prerequisites

* https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/[Docker and Docker Compose^] installed on your host machine
* At least 4GB RAM available
* `make` (optional, but recommended)

This lab is for Linux and macOS users. If you are using Windows, you must use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run the commands in this lab.

== Run the lab

. Clone this repository:
+
[,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs.git
----

. Change into the `docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo/` directory:
+
[,bash]
----
cd redpanda-labs/docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo
----

. Set the required environment variables for the container versions.
+
Set the `REDPANDA_VERSION` environment variable to the version of Redpanda that you want to run. For all available versions, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/releases[GitHub releases^].
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_VERSION={latest-redpanda-version}
----
+
Set the `REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION` environment variable:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONSOLE_VERSION={latest-console-version}
----
+
Set the `REDPANDA_CONNECT_VERSION` environment variable for the migrator:
+
[,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
export REDPANDA_CONNECT_VERSION={latest-connect-version}
----

. Start the demo environment:
+
[,bash]
----
make start
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose up -d --wait", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo", "timeout": 300000})
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 10000})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec redpanda-source rpk cluster health", "output": "/Healthy/"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec redpanda-target rpk cluster health", "output": "/Healthy/"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "curl -s http://localhost:4195/ping", "output": "/pong/"})
+
This starts source and target Redpanda clusters, Redpanda Console instances, and the migrator service. See `docker-compose.yml` for port mappings and service details.

. Set up users, ACLs, topics, and schemas:
+
[,bash]
----
make setup
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose exec rpk-client /scripts/setup.sh", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo", "timeout": 180000, "output": "/Secure Setup Complete/"})
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 90000})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec rpk-client rpk topic list --brokers redpanda-source:9092 -X user=admin-user -X pass=admin-secret-password -X sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-256", "output": "/demo-orders/"})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "curl -s -u admin-user:admin-secret-password http://localhost:28081/subjects", "output": "/demo-orders-value/"})
+
This creates users with SASL authentication, configures ACLs for secure migration, creates demo topics with various cleanup policies, and registers schemas. See `scripts/setup.sh` for detailed ACL permissions and topic configurations.

. (Optional) Verify the ACL configuration:
+
[,bash]
----
make verify-acls
----
+
This tests that `migrator-user` has correct read-only source access and read-write target access with proper restrictions. See `scripts/verify-acls.sh` for test details.

. Start continuous data production:
+
[,bash]
----
make demo-start
----
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec rpk-client bash -c 'echo test | rpk topic produce demo-orders --brokers redpanda-source:9092 -X user=admin-user -X pass=admin-secret-password -X sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-256'"})
// (step {"action":"wait", "duration": 15000})
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker exec rpk-client rpk topic list --brokers redpanda-target:9092 -X user=admin-user -X pass=admin-secret-password -X sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-256", "output": "/demo-orders/"})
+
This starts a background producer that sends approximately 81 messages every 2 seconds across all demo topics.

. Verify continuous schema syncing:
+
[,bash]
----
make verify-continuous-schema
----
+
This test registers a new schema after the migrator starts and confirms it automatically appears in the target Schema Registry within 15 seconds.

. Monitor migration lag:
+
[,bash]
----
make monitor-lag
----
+
This displays a real-time dashboard showing lag per topic, message counts, and production status. Press Ctrl+C to exit.

. When finished, stop continuous production:
+
[,bash]
----
make demo-stop
----

== Verify data consistency

Run the verification script to confirm successful migration:

[,bash]
----
make verify
----

This checks:

* All topics are migrated
* Partition counts match
* Message counts match
* Cleanup policies are preserved
* Schemas are migrated

== Configuration

The migrator uses the principle of least privilege with non-superuser accounts. For detailed security configuration including users, ACLs, and permissions, see:

* `scripts/setup.sh` - User creation and ACL configuration
* `config/migrator-config.yaml` - Migrator settings and Schema Registry sync
* `docker-compose.yml` - Service ports and environment variables

== Clean up

To stop and remove all containers and data:

[,bash]
----
make clean
----

== Troubleshoot

=== Authentication errors

If you see "ILLEGAL_SASL_STATE" errors, run `make setup` to configure SASL authentication.

=== Topics not appearing in target

Check that the migrator is running:

[,bash]
----
docker compose ps migrator
curl http://localhost:4195/ping
----

Check the migrator logs:

[,bash]
----
docker compose logs migrator
----

=== Schemas not migrating

If you see "Subject is not in import mode" errors, enable import mode:

[,bash]
----
curl -X PUT http://localhost:28081/mode \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -u 'admin-user:admin-secret-password' \
  -d '{"mode":"IMPORT"}'
----

Then restart the migrator:

[,bash]
----
docker compose restart migrator
----

== Next steps

After running this demo:

ifndef::env-site[]
* Read the https://docs.redpanda.com/redpanda-connect/cookbooks/redpanda_migrator/[Redpanda Migrator documentation^]
* Learn about https://docs.redpanda.com/current/manage/schema-registry/[Schema Registry^] configuration
* Explore https://docs.redpanda.com/current/manage/security/authentication/[Redpanda authentication^] options
endif::[]
ifdef::env-site[]
* Read the xref:redpanda-connect:cookbooks:redpanda_migrator.adoc[Redpanda Migrator documentation]
* Learn about xref:ROOT:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Schema Registry] configuration
* Explore xref:ROOT:manage:security/authentication.adoc[Redpanda authentication] options
endif::[]
// (step {"action":"runShell", "command": "docker compose down -v", "workingDirectory": "../docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo"})
// (test end)
